# Shock the Monkey

As you probably saw coming in, the title of this text is "Nerd-First Design: How and Why to Build Your Thing Around the Ones Who Will Geek Out Over It". (If you bought this text without that cover, it was probably ripped off, and you should get your money back.) I want you to geek out over what I'm writing here, so I'm going to start off with the "Why" part of that.

You'll note that I'm not saying what "your thing" is. Maybe it's an app, or a service. Maybe it's a movie script. Maybe it's a new technique for brewing coffee, or juggling hackey sacks. When I say people will geek out over your thing, it doesn't have to be the center of their lives. Whatever your thing is, if you want people to share it, this stuff applies.

You should design around the people your thing is important to because **they're the ones who get other people to pick it up**. There are a few other factors involved in getting people to pick your thing up; because I'm weird, I'm going to explain my thoughts on this using a polynomial function with emoji for variables (which I'm then going to *explain*, obviously - I said I'm weird, not *insane*):

:family: = :eyes:(:zap::monkey:)&sup2; + :ear:(:lips:) - :poop:

What this basically says is:

**How many people pick your thing up**

is based on

**how much they see people like themselves making their lives nicer using it**,

_multiplied by **how much they see themselves making their lives nicer using it like those people**_,

plus **how much they get urged to use it by sources they trust**,

minus _how hard, weird, and/or uncool it looks_.

### A Variable-By-Variable Breakdown

:family: is the stand-in for "adoption", which is what we're figuring out with this equation. (Past the part where the thing gets picked up, this has also been called "traction".)

:eyes: is the function of *perception*, which clarifies that the next two variables (the key to this whole equation) only matter inasmuch as the person thinking about picking your thing up is *seeing* the personal value they'd get in picking it up. All their best friends could be having life-changing experiences left and right using this thing, but if a person isn't *seeing* the real impact it's having on their friends, they're more likely to get caught up in superficial attributes like how uncool the thing looks.

:zap: is how *powerful* the thing is: how much it [takes care of business](http://www.elvisblog.net/2012/03/31/elvis-captain-marvel-jr-and-the-tcb-lightning-bolt/) for the people who use it. This *multiplies* the other factor: if :zap: is high, this is a boon (just a few friends having a really great time can sell it). However, if the usefulness of the thing isn't so great (:zap: is fractional), this is a *bust*: if I see lots of my friends having an experience that says something is more trouble than it's worth, I'm going to stay away (it can cut their influence in *half*).

:monkey: is *how much of a person's immediate social sphere* has picked a thing up. This is a kind of complex stand-in, but it's based on factors that are kind of hard to quantify: it's not just how *many* people have picked the thing up, it's how much people *the person identifies with* the people who've picked it up (in other words, how close they are). This controls the "monkey see, monkey do" aspect of picking the thing up - the closeness of people can be thought of in terms of what Cracked.com editor David Wong has described as [a person's "Monkeysphere"](http://www.cracked.com/article_14990_what-monkeysphere.html). Like :zap:, this can help *or* hurt the key adoption factor: one person I strongly respect can influence me to pick up something they do, but a bunch of people I don't really admire can turn me off of doing something to be more like them.

&sup2; isn't really an emoji: for those of us for whom high school algebra was a long time ago, this is an *exponent*, stating that the thing to the left (here, :eyes:(:zap::monkey:)) is multiplied by itself. In this equation, our key factor (how much someone sees people like themselves using your thing to get what they want from life) is multiplied by itself, because how much a person sees people doing something they like doesn't just influence a person's actions based on those people: it influences their actions toward the pursuit of *being one of* those people. This multiplicative effect is **so important**, it's why the rest of this book revolves around this being the only factor you really need to worry about: however, there *are* a few other factors in play that you end up needing to think about, at least in the early stages where :eyes:, :zap:, and/or :monkey: are nonexistent.

:ear: is the function of much a person *hears* about the thing, without actually *seeing* the thing do anything for the people who've picked it up. This is things like word-of-mouth and advertising (as well as requests and demands), which, in theory, grow in effectiveness as they increase in volume (both in the sense of *quantity* and of *loudness*), though in practice you're likely to find the more you raise the volume, the more people cover their ears.

:lips: is *where that stuff a person hears is coming from* and *what they're saying*. Unsurprisingly, it has similar values to the things that are important for :zap::monkey: (where respected friends matter a lot and banner ads matter so little as to be nonexistent); however, with :lips:, all these things kind of get boiled down to one general "message" (since it becomes difficult to pin down exactly who has what feelings about what). :lips: can also be a boss *telling* a person they *have* to use the thing, or be fired (which is how so much stuff with *no* :zap::monkey: gets picked up in the corporate world).

:poop: is how much *it looks like using a thing won't be worth it*. Pretty much *everything* has this, to some degree: you can give it a catchy name, a cool logo, and minimize the things that don't work the way people are used to, but ultimately, *everything* is "one more thing" that, absent any reason to pick it up, most people will deem themselves too busy to try. :poop: is the *initial friction* to picking something up - once your thing has any meaningful :eyes:(:zap::monkey:)&sup2;, it will most likely dwarf its :poop:, but in the early stages (which will take longer, if your thing has an unavoidably high amount of :poop: before people can :eyes: its :zap::monkey:), you will have to overcome :poop: with :ear:(:lips:).
